.\" SPDX-License-Identifier: ISC
.Dd July 6, 2026
.Dt CLM-CONFIG 5
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm clm-config
.Nd clm configuration file format
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Xr clm 1
reads its configuration from
.Pa ~/.config/clm/config.lua
(or
.Ev XDG_CONFIG_HOME Ns Pa /clm/config.lua
if that variable is set).
The file is plain Lua: it must
.Ic return
a table, evaluated once at startup by a long-lived interpreter that
also backs agent profile loading and the
.Va clm.secrets
table
.Pq Xr clm-tool 5 .
.Pp
Top-level keys:
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Va agent
Name of the default agent profile to load from
.Pa ~/.config/clm/agents/ Ns Ar name Ns Pa .lua .
Overridden by
.Xr clm 1 Ns 's
.Fl -agent
flag.
If neither is set, the top-level
.Va model
and
.Va system_prompt
below apply directly with no named profile.
.It Va model
A
.Qq Ar provider Ns / Ns Ar model-id
spec: which
.Va providers
(below) entry to connect through, and the literal wire model id to
request, which doubles as the key into that provider's own
.Va models
subtable (if it has a matching entry there -- see below).
Overridden by
.Xr clm 1 Ns 's
.Fl -model
flag, which takes the same
.Qq Ar provider Ns / Ns Ar model-id
form.
A bare id with no
.Qq /
is also accepted, meaning "request this literal wire id on whatever
connection is otherwise active" -- useful for an id a server reports
live that was never added to any provider's
.Va models
table.
There is no separate top-level
.Va provider
key: failing over to a different connection for the current model,
without changing which wire model id is requested or editing
.Va providers ,
is done at runtime only, via
.Xr clm 1 Ns 's
.Fl -provider
flag or the TUI's
.Ic /provider
command -- both read directly from
.Va providers
(below) by name.
.It Va providers
A table of provider (connection) definitions, keyed by name.
Each entry may set:
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Va kind
Wire dialect to speak:
.Qq openai ,
.Qq anthropic ,
or
.Qq ollama .
Defaults to
.Qq openai
if unset.
.It Va url
Base API endpoint, e.g.
.Qq http://127.0.0.1:8081/v1 .
.Pa /chat/completions
is appended automatically.
.It Va api_key
Bearer token.
Prefer
.Va clm.secrets.*
.Pq see Xr clm-tool 5
over a literal key here, since
.Pa config.lua
often ends up shared or checked into dotfiles.
Overridden by the
.Ev CLM_API_KEY
environment variable if set.
.It Va rate_tokens_per_sec , Va rate_burst
Token-bucket rate limiter parameters for tool dispatch.
.It Va models
A table of per-model overrides nested under this provider, keyed by
the literal wire model id (the same string sent on the wire and used
as the second half of a
.Va model
spec -- there is no separate field repeating it).
An entry here is optional: a provider can be requested with any model
id, configured or not, and only gets these overrides applied when one
happens to match.
Each entry may set:
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Va context_size
Override the context window size (tokens) the agent assumes, instead
of learning it from the backend.
.It Va autocompact_pct
Override the percentage of the context window that triggers automatic
conversation summarization.
.El
.El
.It Va system_prompt
The system message sent to the model.
A built-in default is used if unset.
.It Va tools
Per-plugin configuration, keyed by tool/plugin name.
Each plugin sees only its own subtable, as
.Va clm.config
(see
.Xr clm-tool 5 ) .
.It Va volatile_tools
A list of
.Xr fnmatch 3
patterns naming tools whose results go stale as soon as a newer
result exists (a map read, a status query).
When a matching tool completes, every prior result from that same
tool is replaced in place with a short stub of the form
.Qq [superseded by newer X]
(where
.Sq X
is the tool's name)
before the new result is recorded, keeping the request prefix
byte-stable for backend prompt caching while bounding history growth.
.It Va mcp_servers
A list of
.Lk https://modelcontextprotocol.io MCP
server definitions to connect to at startup.
Each entry is a table with:
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Va name
Used to namespace the server's tools as
.Qq mcp__X__Y
(where
.Sq X
is this
.Va name
and
.Sq Y
is the tool's own name),
matching the scheme Claude Code uses for MCP-sourced tools, so
identically-named tools from different servers, or from a builtin
tool, never collide.
.It Va transport
Either
.Qq stdio
(the default if omitted) or
.Qq http .
.It Va command
For
.Qq stdio :
an argv array; the server is spawned as a subprocess and speaks
JSON-RPC over its stdin/stdout.
A crashing stdio server is automatically restarted, with a small
backoff budget so a genuine crash loop does not turn into a
fork/exec storm; its tools disappear from the model's view while it
is down and reappear once it is back.
.It Va url
For
.Qq http :
the server's endpoint.
One JSON-RPC POST per call, no persistent connection.
This transport is newer and less exercised than
.Qq stdio ;
it expects a plain JSON response per call, not an SSE-streamed one.
.It Va api_key
Optional bearer token for an
.Qq http
server.
.It Va timeout_ms
Optional per-call deadline for either transport.
Defaults to 30000 (30s).
.El
.El
.Pp
Agent profile files under
.Pa ~/.config/clm/agents/
share the same schema as the top level (they are merged over it,
profile values winning) and may set any of the same keys except
.Va agent
itself.
.Sh SECRETS
.Pa ~/.config/clm/secrets.lua ,
mode 0600, is loaded automatically (if present) alongside
.Pa config.lua
and exposed as the global
.Va clm.secrets
table to
.Pa config.lua
and to agent profile files, letting them write
.Va api_key = clm.secrets.provider_name
instead of a literal key.
It must also
.Ic return
a table; there is no required schema beyond that, since keys are
referenced by whatever name the rest of the configuration expects.
.Xr clm 1
warns, via
.Ev CLM_DEBUG_LOG ,
if this file is readable by group or other.
.Sh EXAMPLES
A minimal single-provider, single-model configuration:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
return {
    model = "ollama/qwen3-32b",
    providers = {
        ollama = {
            kind = "ollama",
            url = "http://127.0.0.1:8081/v1",
            api_key = clm.secrets.ollama,
        },
    },
    tools = {
        web_search = { api_key = clm.secrets.tavily },
        weather = { units = "metric" },
    },
    volatile_tools = { "local_map", "character_status" },
}
.Ed
.Pp
A second model sharing the same connection, with per-model context
overrides, plus a backup provider for failover
.Pq Xr clm 1 Ns 's Fl -provider , No or the TUI's Ic /provider command :
.Bd -literal -offset indent
return {
    model = "ollama/qwen3-8b",
    providers = {
        ollama = {
            kind = "ollama",
            url = "http://127.0.0.1:8081/v1",
            api_key = clm.secrets.ollama,
            models = {
                ["qwen3-8b"] = {
                    context_size = 32768,
                },
                ["qwen3-32b"] = {
                    context_size = 131072,
                    autocompact_pct = 80,
                },
            },
        },
        ollama_backup = {
            kind = "ollama",
            url = "http://10.0.0.2:8081/v1",
            api_key = clm.secrets.ollama,
        },
    },
}
.Ed
.Pp
The corresponding
.Pa secrets.lua :
.Bd -literal -offset indent
return {
    tavily = "tvly-...",
    ollama = "...",
}
.Ed
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr clm 1 ,
.Xr clm-tool 5
