.\" SPDX-License-Identifier: ISC
.Dd July 6, 2026
.Dt CLM-TOOL 5
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm clm-tool
.Nd clm Lua plugin and tool API
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Xr clm 1
loads every
.Pa *.lua
file in
.Pa ~/.config/clm/plugins/
(or a directory given with
.Fl -plugins ,
or an agent-specific
.Pa ~/.config/clm/agents/ Ns Ar agent Ns Pa /
directory) as a plugin.
Each plugin file gets its own sandboxed
.Xr lua 1
state and is expected to call
.Va clm.tool_register
at least once, at load time, to register the tools it provides.
.Ss Sandbox
Only the
.Va string , table , math ,
and
.Va utf8
standard libraries are loaded;
.Va os
and
.Va io
are never loaded at all, and
.Va dofile , loadfile , load , require ,
and
.Va collectgarbage
are removed from
.Va _G
after loading the safe libraries.
There is no filesystem or process access except through
.Va clm.read_file
and
.Va clm.write_file
(below), no dynamic code loading, and no way to reach any other
plugin's state.
.Pp
A plugin has an 8 MiB private memory cap, a 500 ms deadline to
finish executing its top-level (load-time) code, and a separate,
per-tool-call CPU deadline (the
.Va timeout_ms
field of
.Va clm.tool_register ,
below; 30 s if unset), checked every 10000 VM instructions so a
tight infinite loop cannot dodge it.
Exceeding either deadline aborts execution of that plugin or call;
a load-time failure is logged and that one plugin's tools are simply
not registered; the rest of the plugin directory still loads.
.Ss Registering a tool
.Bd -literal -offset indent
clm.tool_register(name, {
    description = "...",       -- optional
    params_schema = { ... },   -- optional, a JSON-Schema-shaped table
    invoke = function(args, ctx)
        ...
        ctx:complete(result)   -- or ctx:fail(message)
    end,
    timeout_ms = 30000,        -- optional, overrides the default
    no_prompt = false,         -- optional, skip the permission prompt
    hidden = false,            -- optional, hide from the model's schema
})
.Ed
.Pp
.Va name
must be unique across every plugin and builtin tool loaded into the
agent.
.Va invoke
is called once per tool invocation with
.Va args
(the decoded JSON arguments the model supplied, following
.Va params_schema )
and
.Va ctx ,
described below.
exactly one of
.Va ctx:complete
or
.Va ctx:fail
must be called, from
.Va invoke
or from a child started with
.Fn clm.spawn
(see
.Sx HTTP requests
below); calling either a second time is an error.
.Pp
By default a tool is gated behind an interactive allow/deny prompt the
first time it is called in a session (see
.Xr clm_agent 3 Ns 's
.Va on_permission
callback); set
.Va no_prompt = true
for a tool with no side effects worth confirming.
.Va hidden = true
omits the tool from the schema advertised to the model entirely, for
a tool meant to be invoked only by other plugin code, not by the
model itself.
.Ss The ctx object
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Fn ctx:complete result
Ends the invocation successfully.
.Va result
is a string; the model sees it as the tool's output.
.It Fn ctx:fail message
Ends the invocation with a failure the model sees as
.Qq [tool failed: X]
(where
.Sq X
is
.Va message ) .
.It Fn ctx:args_raw
Returns the raw, undecoded JSON arguments string
.Po Qq {}
if the model supplied none
.Pc .
Most plugins use the decoded
.Va args
table passed to
.Va invoke
instead; this is for a plugin that wants to reparse or forward the
arguments verbatim.
.It Fn ctx:log message
Writes
.Va message
to the debug log (see
.Ev CLM_DEBUG_LOG
in
.Xr clm 1 ) .
A no-op, at negligible cost, when that variable is unset.
.El
.Ss HTTP requests
.Bd -literal -offset indent
local resp, err = http.get(url)
local resp, err = http.get(url, {["Authorization"] = "Bearer ..."})
local resp, err = http.post(url, body)
local resp, err = http.post(url, body, {["Content-Type"] = "text/plain"})
.Ed
.Pp
both yield the calling coroutine and resume it once the request
completes, so
.Va invoke
does not block the agent's event loop while a request is in flight.
they may be called from the main tool coroutine or from a child started
with
.Fn clm.spawn ,
but not at plugin load time.
.Va headers
is an optional table of header-name to header-value strings;
.Fn http.post
seeds
.Qq Content-Type: application/json
by default unless
.Va headers
overrides it.
.Pp
On success,
.Va resp
is a table with
.Va resp.status
(the HTTP status code) and
.Va resp.body
(the response body as a string);
.Va err
is
.Dv nil .
On failure,
.Va resp
is
.Dv nil
and
.Va err
is a string describing what went wrong.
Up to 8 requests per plugin may be in flight concurrently, and a
single tool call may make at most 128 requests in total; exceeding
either limit fails the request rather than queuing it.
.Ss Other clm module functions
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Fn clm.read_file path
.It Fn clm.write_file path content
Read or write a file, without the sandbox's normal lack of filesystem
access.
Available at any point in a plugin, not just from within
.Va invoke .
.It Fn clm.sleep ms
yield the calling coroutine for
.Va ms
milliseconds without blocking the event loop.
same coroutine restriction as
.Sx HTTP requests
above.
.It Fn clm.spawn function
create and return a task handle for
.Va function .
the function is scheduled for a later event-loop iteration and does not
execute before
.Fn clm.spawn
returns.
the task belongs to the current tool invocation and may call
.Fn http.get ,
.Fn http.post ,
and
.Fn clm.sleep .
only the main tool coroutine may spawn tasks; a task may not spawn another
task.
values returned by
.Va function
become the task result.
.It Fn task:wait
wait until
.Va task
succeeds, fails, or is cancelled, then return
.Dv true .
waiting does not read or interpret the task result.
.It Fn task:result
return
.Dv nil
if
.Va task
is pending.
a terminal task returns a stable outcome table.
a successful outcome has
.Va ok
set to
.Dv true
and one normalized
.Va value
field: one returned value is stored directly, multiple returned values are
stored in an array, and zero returned values omit
.Va value .
a failed outcome has
.Va ok
set to
.Dv false
and an
.Va error
string.
a cancelled outcome also has
.Va cancelled
set to
.Dv true .
reading a failed outcome marks its error as observed.
.It Fn task:cancel reason
cancel a pending task and its asynchronous operation.
.Va reason
is optional and defaults to
.Dq task cancelled .
return
.Dv true
when the task was cancelled or was already cancelled, and
.Dv false
when it had already succeeded or failed.
.It Fn clm.wait_any tasks timeout_ms
wait until any task in the array table
.Va tasks
is terminal and return its one-based input index.
.Va timeout_ms
is optional; expiration returns
.Dv nil
plus
.Dq timeout
without cancelling any task.
all tasks must be unique handles from the current invocation, and at most 128
tasks may be waited on at once.
.It Fn clm.await_all tasks
wait for every task and return an ordered array of outcome tables as described
under
.Fn task:result .
task failure does not cancel or otherwise affect another task.
.It Fn clm.try_all tasks
wait for tasks until all succeed or one fails.
on success, return normalized task values in input order.
on failure, cancel every unfinished task in this set and return
.Dv nil
plus the observed error string.
.Pp
only the main tool coroutine may wait, read results, cancel tasks, or complete
or fail the tool.
returning from the main
.Va invoke
function with live tasks cancels those tasks and fails the tool.
successfully completing a tool with live tasks or unobserved task errors also
fails the tool;
.Fn clm.spawn
does not create detached background work.
the invocation remains alive while its main coroutine or child tasks are
suspended; tool cancellation, timeout, and plugin teardown cancel the whole
family and its pending asynchronous work.
.El
.Ss The json module
.Bd -literal -offset indent
local text = json.encode(value)
local value, err = json.decode(text)
.Ed
.Pp
A global
.Va json
table over
.Xr json-c 3 .
.Va json.null
is a sentinel light userdata value representing JSON
.Li null ,
distinct from Lua
.Va nil .
.Va json.decode
rejects input larger than 2 MiB.
.Ss Per-tool configuration
If the plugin's file or tool name appears as a key under
.Va tools
in
.Pa config.lua
(see
.Xr clm-config 5 ) ,
that subtable is available inside the plugin as
.Va clm.config .
A plugin with no matching
.Va tools
entry sees
.Va clm.config
as an empty table, not
.Dv nil .
.Sh EXAMPLES
.Bd -literal -offset indent
-- ~/.config/clm/plugins/hello.lua
clm.tool_register("hello", {
    description = "Say hello to someone",
    params_schema = {
        type = "object",
        properties = {
            name = { type = "string", description = "who to greet" },
        },
        required = { "name" },
    },
    invoke = function(args, ctx)
        ctx:complete("Hello, " .. args.name .. "!")
    end,
})
.Ed
.Bd -literal -offset indent
local tasks = {
    clm.spawn(function()
        local resp, err = http.get(url_a)
        if resp == nil then error(err) end
        return resp.body
    end),
    clm.spawn(function()
        local resp, err = http.get(url_b)
        if resp == nil then error(err) end
        return resp.body
    end),
}
local outcomes = clm.await_all(tasks)
for _, outcome in ipairs(outcomes) do
    if not outcome.ok then
        ctx:fail(outcome.error)
        return
    end
end
ctx:complete(outcomes[1].value .. outcomes[2].value)
.Ed
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr clm 1 ,
.Xr clm_agent 3 ,
.Xr clm-config 5
