.\" SPDX-License-Identifier: ISC
.Dd July 6, 2026
.Dt CLM 1
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm clm
.Nd LLM agent with a Lua plugin system
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm
.Cm setup
.Nm
.Op Fl H | Fl -headless
.Op Fl S | Fl -no-stream
.Op Fl V | Fl -version
.Op Fl a Ar name | Fl -agent Ar name
.Op Fl f Ar prompt | Fl -forever Ar prompt
.Op Fl m Ar provider/model-id | Fl -model Ar provider/model-id
.Op Fl -provider Ar name
.Op Fl o Ar prompt | Fl -oneshot Ar prompt
.Op Fl p Ar dir | Fl -plugins Ar dir
.Op Fl r Op Ar id | Fl -resume Op Ar id
.Op Fl u Ar base | Fl -url Ar base
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Nm
runs a conversational LLM agent against any OpenAI-compatible chat
completions endpoint (llama.cpp, Ollama, OpenAI, Anthropic's
OpenAI-compatible endpoint), with a Lua plugin system for custom
tools; see
.Xr clm-tool 5 .
With no options, and when both standard input and standard output are
a terminal,
.Nm
runs its interactive
.Xr curses 3
UI.
Otherwise it falls back to a plain line-oriented REPL on standard
input/output, which is also what
.Fl -oneshot
uses.
.Pp
.Nm Cm setup
writes a starter
.Pa config.lua
and
.Pa secrets.lua
into
.Ev XDG_CONFIG_HOME Ns Pa /clm
(or
.Pa ~/.config/clm
if
.Ev XDG_CONFIG_HOME
is unset) and seeds the builtin plugins into its
.Pa plugins
subdirectory; see
.Xr clm-config 5 .
Safe to re-run: it never overwrites a file that already exists.
.Pp
The options are as follows:
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Fl a Ar name , Fl -agent Ar name
Use the agent profile named
.Ar name
.Po
.Pa ~/.config/clm/agents/ Ns Ar name Ns Pa .lua
.Pc .
If omitted, the
.Va agent
key in
.Pa config.lua
is used, or otherwise the top-level
.Va model
setting applies directly with no named profile.
.It Fl f Ar prompt , Fl -forever Ar prompt
Interactive UI mode only.
Submit
.Ar prompt
immediately, then automatically resubmit it every time a turn
completes with nothing else queued, so the agent keeps going without
a human re-prompting it each turn.
.It Fl H , Fl -headless
Force the plain stdio REPL even when standard input and standard
output are both a terminal.
.It Fl m Ar provider/model-id , Fl -model Ar provider/model-id
A
.Qq Ar provider Ns / Ns Ar model-id
spec, same form and meaning as
.Pa config.lua Ns 's
top-level
.Va model
.Pq Xr clm-config 5 :
.Ar provider
names an entry in
.Va providers
to connect through, and
.Ar model-id
is the literal wire model id requested (also the key into that
provider's
.Va models
subtable, if it has a matching override entry there).
A bare
.Ar model-id
with no
.Qq /
is instead used directly as a literal model id to request from
.Fl -url
(or whatever connection is otherwise active), with no provider lookup
and no per-model overrides applied.
Overrides whatever the active agent profile or
.Pa config.lua Ns 's
top-level
.Va model
would otherwise supply.
.It Fl -provider Ar name
Name of an entry in
.Pa config.lua Ns 's
.Va providers
table
.Pq Xr clm-config 5 ,
overriding which provider connection (endpoint, key, wire dialect)
backs the selected model, independent of
.Fl m .
Useful for failing over to a backup endpoint for the current model.
.It Fl o Ar prompt , Fl -oneshot Ar prompt
Run a single prompt headlessly and exit, printing only the assistant's
reply (plus any tool-call/error lines) to standard output.
The process exits 0 if the turn completed successfully, or 1 otherwise.
.It Fl p Ar dir , Fl -plugins Ar dir
Load Lua plugins from
.Ar dir
instead of the default
.Ev XDG_CONFIG_HOME Ns Pa /clm/plugins .
.It Fl r Op Ar id , Fl -resume Op Ar id
Resume the saved session
.Ar id
in the interactive UI, replaying its transcript and continuing the
conversation in the same session log.
With no
.Ar id ,
present a numbered list of saved sessions to pick from.
Sessions are logged automatically to
.Ev XDG_STATE_HOME Ns Pa /clm
.Po default
.Pa ~/.local/state/clm
.Pc ,
one append-only
.Pa .jsonl
file per session; on exit the session id is printed for later
resumption, and a session in which nothing was said is deleted.
The
.Ic /clear
command starts a fresh session file, leaving the old one resumable.
Incompatible with
.Fl -oneshot
and
.Fl -headless .
.It Fl S , Fl -no-stream
Request non-streamed responses instead of the default
server-sent-events streaming.
.It Fl u Ar base , Fl -url Ar base
Base API endpoint.
.Pa /chat/completions
is appended automatically; do not include it in
.Ar base .
Defaults to
.Pa http://127.0.0.1:8081/v1 .
.It Fl V , Fl -version
Print the version number and exit.
.It Fl h , Fl -help
Print usage and exit.
.El
.Sh ENVIRONMENT
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Ev CLM_API_KEY
Bearer token sent as
.Li Authorization: Bearer Ar key
on every request to the configured endpoint.
Takes precedence over any
.Va api_key
set in
.Pa config.lua
or an agent profile.
Servers that need no authentication (most local llama.cpp/Ollama
setups) can leave this unset.
.It Ev XDG_CONFIG_HOME
Base directory for
.Pa clm/config.lua ,
.Pa clm/secrets.lua ,
.Pa clm/plugins/ ,
and
.Pa clm/agents/ .
Defaults to
.Pa ~/.config
if unset.
.It Ev CLM_DEBUG_LOG
Path to a file that internal debug logging is appended to.
Unset (the default) disables logging entirely, nothing is written,
and the check is cheap enough to leave alone in production.
.El
.Sh FILES
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Pa ~/.config/clm/config.lua
Provider, model, agent, and per-tool plugin configuration; see
.Xr clm-config 5 .
.It Pa ~/.config/clm/secrets.lua
API keys and other secrets, kept separate from
.Pa config.lua
so the latter can be shared or checked into dotfiles.
Mode 0600;
.Nm
warns (via
.Ev CLM_DEBUG_LOG )
if it is readable by group or other.
.It Pa ~/.config/clm/agents/*.lua
Per-agent profiles, each overriding or extending
.Pa config.lua Ns 's
settings; see
.Xr clm-config 5 .
.It Pa ~/.config/clm/plugins/*.lua
Lua plugins, each registering one or more tools; see
.Xr clm-tool 5 .
.El
.Sh EXIT STATUS
.Ex -std
Under
.Fl -oneshot ,
the exit status instead reflects whether that single turn completed
successfully (0) or not (1).
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr clm_agent 3 ,
.Xr clm-config 5 ,
.Xr clm-tool 5
