.\" SPDX-License-Identifier: ISC
.Dd July 6, 2026
.Dt CLM_AGENT 3
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm clm_agent_new ,
.Nm clm_agent_free ,
.Nm clm_agent_free_ptr ,
.Nm clm_agent_submit ,
.Nm clm_agent_cancel ,
.Nm clm_agent_compact ,
.Nm clm_agent_check_connection ,
.Nm clm_agent_set_provider ,
.Nm clm_agent_get_state ,
.Nm clm_agent_get_ctx_max ,
.Nm clm_agent_get_last_error ,
.Nm clm_agent_over_autocompact_threshold ,
.Nm clm_agent_take_mid_chain_compact_started ,
.Nm clm_agent_take_mid_chain_compact_succeeded ,
.Nm clm_agent_take_mid_chain_compact_error
.Nd create and drive a clm agent
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.In clm/clm.h
.Ft int
.Fo clm_agent_new
.Fa "const struct clm_cfg *cfg"
.Fa "struct clm_host *host"
.Fa "const struct clm_callbacks *cb"
.Fa "void *user"
.Fa "struct clm_agent **out"
.Fc
.Ft void
.Fn clm_agent_free "struct clm_agent *agent"
.Ft void
.Fn clm_agent_free_ptr "struct clm_agent **agent"
.Ft int
.Fn clm_agent_submit "struct clm_agent *agent" "const char *prompt"
.Ft int
.Fn clm_agent_cancel "struct clm_agent *agent"
.Ft int
.Fn clm_agent_compact "struct clm_agent *agent"
.Ft int
.Fn clm_agent_check_connection "struct clm_agent *agent"
.Ft int
.Fo clm_agent_set_provider
.Fa "struct clm_agent *agent"
.Fa "const char *base_url"
.Fa "const char *api_key"
.Fa "const char *model"
.Fc
.Ft "enum clm_agent_state"
.Fn clm_agent_get_state "const struct clm_agent *agent"
.Ft int64_t
.Fn clm_agent_get_ctx_max "const struct clm_agent *agent"
.Ft "const char *"
.Fn clm_agent_get_last_error "const struct clm_agent *agent"
.Ft bool
.Fn clm_agent_over_autocompact_threshold "const struct clm_agent *agent"
.Ft bool
.Fn clm_agent_take_mid_chain_compact_started "struct clm_agent *agent"
.Ft bool
.Fn clm_agent_take_mid_chain_compact_succeeded "struct clm_agent *agent"
.Ft bool
.Fn clm_agent_take_mid_chain_compact_error "struct clm_agent *agent"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
A
.Vt struct clm_agent
is a single conversational agent: an OpenAI-compatible chat loop, a tool
registry, and conversation history, all driven asynchronously through a
caller-supplied
.Vt struct clm_host
(transport and timers; see
.Xr clm_host 3 ) .
.Pp
.Fn clm_agent_new
creates an agent bound to
.Fa host
and returns it in
.Fa out .
.Fa cfg
is copied at the call, so the caller does not need to keep it alive
afterward
.Em but
every string field inside it
.Po
.Va api_key ,
.Va base_url ,
.Va model ,
.Va system_prompt ,
.Va volatile_tools
.Pc
is
.Em borrowed ,
not copied, and must stay valid for the life of the agent.
.Fa cb
may be
.Dv NULL
if the caller wants no events at all; otherwise every field in it is
optional, since the library checks each callback pointer before calling
it, so a minimal caller can set only
.Va on_turn_done .
.Fa user
is an opaque pointer passed back to every callback.
The caller owns
.Fa host
and whatever it wraps (e.g. an event loop);
.Fn clm_agent_new
never tears it down.
.Pp
.Fn clm_agent_free
releases an agent and everything it owns: the tool registry, conversation
history, and any turn state.
Does not touch the
.Vt clm_host
it was created with.
.Pp
.Fn clm_agent_free_ptr
calls
.Fn clm_agent_free
on
.Fa *agent
and sets
.Fa *agent
to
.Dv NULL .
It is intended for use with the
.Dv _cleanup_clm_
attribute, which arranges for automatic release when a variable goes out
of scope:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
_cleanup_clm_ struct clm_agent *agent = NULL;
int r;

r = clm_agent_new(&cfg, host, &cb, NULL, &agent);
if (r < 0) {
        errno = -r;
        err(1, "clm_agent_new");
}
/* agent is released automatically on all exit paths */
.Ed
.Pp
.Fn clm_agent_submit
starts a user turn.
It returns immediately; the turn itself runs asynchronously as the
caller drives
.Fa host Ns 's
event loop, emitting events through the callbacks passed to
.Fn clm_agent_new
and ending with
.Va on_turn_done .
Callers must not submit a new turn until
.Va on_turn_done
has fired for the previous one.
.Pp
.Fn clm_agent_cancel
aborts whatever is in flight for the current turn (the model request
itself, or any running tool calls) and ends the turn via
.Va on_turn_done
with status
.Er ECANCELED .
Safe to call from inside a callback, e.g. a UI's key handler.
.Pp
.Fn clm_agent_compact
summarizes the conversation so far and folds older turns into that
summary, keeping the system prompt and the most recent turns intact.
This is one extra asynchronous model round-trip; it fires
.Va on_turn_done
when it finishes, unless it was triggered internally, mid-chain,
between tool batches, in which case the interrupted tool chain simply
resumes instead of ending a turn.
.Pp
.Fn clm_agent_check_connection
probes the configured endpoint for reachability with an asynchronous
.Li GET /v1/models .
The result arrives later through the
.Va on_connection
callback.
Safe to call at any time, including while a turn is already in flight.
.Pp
.Fn clm_agent_set_provider
reconfigures the LLM provider on a live agent, swapping the endpoint,
API key, and model.
Safe to call between turns, not while one is in flight.
.Fa base_url
is the full chat completions URL (e.g.
.Qq http://host/v1/chat/completions ) .
.Fa api_key
may be
.Dv NULL
for a server that requires no authentication.
.Pp
.Fn clm_agent_get_state
returns the agent's current
.Vt enum clm_agent_state
( Dv CLM_STATE_IDLE , CLM_STATE_THINKING , CLM_STATE_CALLING_TOOL ,
.Dv CLM_STATE_RATE_LIMITED , CLM_STATE_COMPLETE ,
or
.Dv CLM_STATE_ERROR ) .
.Pp
.Fn clm_agent_get_ctx_max
returns the context window size in tokens, as learned from the backend
(e.g. llama.cpp's
.Pa /props
endpoint), or a non-positive value if it is not yet known.
.Pp
.Fn clm_agent_get_last_error
returns a description of the most recent failure, valid until the next
call that can fail.
.Pp
.Fn clm_agent_over_autocompact_threshold
reports whether the agent's last known context usage is at or above the
autocompaction threshold.
.Fn clm_agent_tools_done
already checks this internally between tool batches to trigger
compaction mid-chain; it is exposed here too so a frontend (e.g. a
status bar) can reflect the same threshold without keeping its own
separate copy of the calculation.
.Pp
.Fn clm_agent_take_mid_chain_compact_started ,
.Fn clm_agent_take_mid_chain_compact_succeeded ,
and
.Fn clm_agent_take_mid_chain_compact_error
each report, once, whether a mid-chain autocompaction (one triggered
internally between tool batches, not by an explicit
.Fn clm_agent_compact
call) has just started, just succeeded, or just failed, respectively.
Every one of these is consuming: it clears its flag on read, so
calling it twice in a row without an intervening event returns
.Dv false
the second time.
There is no dedicated event for any of this
.Po
the whole point of a mid-chain compaction is that the tool chain it
interrupted resumes silently rather than ending the turn
.Pc ,
so a caller that wants to
surface
.Qq compacting...
or
.Qq autocompact failed, continuing anyway
messages should poll these, for instance from the
.Va on_state
callback, rather than expecting a dedicated event.
.Fn clm_agent_get_last_error
holds the actual error message when
.Fn clm_agent_take_mid_chain_compact_error
returns
.Dv true .
.Sh RETURN VALUES
.Fn clm_agent_new ,
.Fn clm_agent_submit ,
.Fn clm_agent_cancel ,
.Fn clm_agent_compact ,
.Fn clm_agent_check_connection ,
and
.Fn clm_agent_set_provider
return 0 on success, or a negative
.Xr errno 2
value on failure.
A negative return from any of these means the action itself never
started; it is not a report of the turn's own eventual outcome, which
always arrives later through
.Va on_turn_done .
.Pp
.Fn clm_agent_free
and
.Fn clm_agent_free_ptr
return nothing.
.Pp
.Fn clm_agent_get_state
returns the agent's current state.
.Fn clm_agent_get_ctx_max
returns the context window size in tokens, or a non-positive value if
unknown.
.Fn clm_agent_get_last_error
returns a borrowed string describing the most recent failure.
.Pp
.Fn clm_agent_over_autocompact_threshold ,
.Fn clm_agent_take_mid_chain_compact_started ,
.Fn clm_agent_take_mid_chain_compact_succeeded ,
and
.Fn clm_agent_take_mid_chain_compact_error
return
.Dv true
or
.Dv false .
.Sh ERRORS
.Bl -tag -width Er
.It Bq Er ENOMEM
.Fn clm_agent_new
failed to allocate memory.
.It Bq Er ECANCELED
.Fn clm_agent_cancel
successfully cancelled a turn that was in flight; this is reported to
.Va on_turn_done
as the turn's status, not returned directly by
.Fn clm_agent_cancel
itself.
.It Bq Er EBUSY
.Fn clm_agent_submit
or
.Fn clm_agent_compact
was called while a turn was already in flight.
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr clm_host 3 ,
.Xr clm_tool_add 3
